KEP: Context support in k8s.io/client-go (#1503)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-api-machinery/20200123-client-go-ctx.md

---
title: Context support in k8s.io/client-go
authors:
- "@mikedanese"
- "@maleck13"
owning-sig: sig-api-machinery
participating-sigs:
- sig-api-machinery
approvers:
- "@deads2k"
- "@liggitt"
- "@lavalamp"
creation-date: 2020-01-23
last-updated: 2020-01-23
status: provisional
---

# Context support in k8s.io/client-go

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
  - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

This proposal outlines a refactoring that would allow propagating of
[context](https://golang.org/pkg/context/) with
[client-go](https://github.com/kubernetes/client-go) with API calls made using
k8s.io/client-go clientsets.

## Motivation

When using client-go, external calls to the Kubernetes API are made in order to
manage resources. Adding support for context propagation along these request
paths enables clean and efficient implementation of cross cutting functionality.
This functionality initially will include:

> - Support for request timeout and cancelation that frees the calling thread. Due

Reviewer: Cancellation

  to issues with authentication and authorization performance, this was
  something that was
  [retrofited](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/83064) in various

>   auth\* expansions but is generally useful.

Reviewer: , but

- Support for distributed tracing. Active
  [efforts](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-instrumentation/0034-distributed-tracing-kep.md#propagating-context-through-objects)
  by SIG Instrumentation to support distributed tracing are either blocked or
  would be substantially simplified with this enhancement.

### Goals

- Allow consumers of k8s.io/client-go to propagate context with API requests
  made using a clientset.

### Non-Goals

- Plumb context to client-go callsites in core Kubernetes. We believe that by
  making this feature available, this type of refactoring will happen over time.

## Proposal

The recommended approach is to pass the context with each action on a resource.
We will modify the signatures of all client interfaces to accept a
`context.Context` as the first argument.  This is idiomatic, explicit, and
produces the least error prone API.

## Design Details

This is an example change to `Pods.Get` implementation:

```go 
func (c *pods) Get(ctx context.Context, name string, options meta_v1.GetOptions) (result *v1.Pod, err error) {
	Result = &v1.Pod{}
	err = c.client.Get().

> 		Context(ctx).

Reviewer: Interesting. I expected to see context passed into methods like Do and/or Into

Reviewer 2: `Get` returns a new `Request` - the context belongs to that request?

Reviewer 3: This [already exists](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/client-go/rest/request.go#L441-L446) in the Request type. Everything after Get/Create/Update is part of the request-specific object. Using the existing context setter on the request seems ok to me.

Reviewer: > This [already exists](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/client-go/rest/request.go#L441-L446) in the Request type. Everything after Get/Create/Update is part of the request-specific object. Using the existing context setter on the request seems ok to me.

It makes it possible to have a mistake.  Other than, "it's here", I don't see why we would perpetuate code that is possible to mis-use if we didn't have to.

Reviewer 3: The request object is already single-shot (it consumes the body reader, etc). Having a context member and a context parameter to `Do` is confusing (if both are specified, I don't think we can merge them)

Reviewer: > The request object is already single-shot (it consumes the body reader, etc). Having a context member and a context parameter to `Do` is confusing (if both are specified, I don't think we can merge them)

The context where you decide to make a request is not necessarily the same as the context where you add the parameters or where you finally make the request.   This example conveniently has them all together, but it doesn't have to be that way.

I would remove the .Context() or at the very least deprecate it.

Author: We should try to avoid repeated changes of widely used public APIs so I think it's worth entertaining whether we should add Options in this batch. The set of callesites that would be affected by refactoring ctx handling in rest.Request is both much smaller and disjoint with the set of callsites that would be affected by the current proposed change. This seems like it could be easily sorted out in a refactor PR.

Reviewer 3: > We should try to avoid repeated changes of widely used public APIs so I think it's worth entertaining whether we should add Options in this batch. 

I think we should. @deads2k agreed [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1503#issuecomment-578892831)

> The set of callesites that would be affected by refactoring ctx handling in rest.Request is both much smaller and disjoint with the set of callsites that would be affected by the current proposed change. This seems like it could be easily sorted out in a refactor PR.

If it touches the Request#Do method, it'll affect all generated clients, right (including ones we intended to snapshot and not touch for two releases)?

Author: I don't think "snapshot and not touch" is the right characterization of these package. What we want to snapshot is the API, so that we have implementations of both the old and new APIs in tree for a 2 release window to allow incremental migration. For that to work, these packages need to get bug fixes, security fixes, and continue to compile.

Reviewer 3: Yeah, sorry, that wasn't quite what I meant. If we address the request context plumbing first, we get the generator to do the work for us.

If picking up 1.18 means getting a signature change in Request#Do AND the code-generator, downstream consumers with their own generated packages don't have a released level of code-generator that will make their current client interface use the new request Do signature. 

I'm happy to defer the decision on the Request signature to the PR. The main thing I care about here is the client interface signatures.

<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

This proposal outlines a refactoring that would allow propagating of
[context](https://golang.org/pkg/context/) with
[client-go](https://github.com/kubernetes/client-go) with API calls made using
k8s.io/client-go clientsets.

## Motivation

When using client-go, external calls to the Kubernetes API are made in order to
manage resources. Adding support for context propagation along these request
paths enables clean and efficient implementation of cross cutting functionality.
This functionality initially will include:

- Support for request timeout and cancelation that frees the calling thread. Due
  to issues with authentication and authorization performance, this was
  something that was
  [retrofited](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/83064) in various
  auth\* expansions but is generally useful.
- Support for distributed tracing. Active
  [efforts](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-instrumentation/0034-distributed-tracing-kep.md#propagating-context-through-objects)
  by SIG Instrumentation to support distributed tracing are either blocked or
  would be substantially simplified with this enhancement.

### Goals

> - Allow consumers of k8s.io/client-go to propage context with API requests made

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Allow consumers of k8s.io/client-go to propagate context with API requests made
```

  using a clientset.

### Non-Goals

- Plumb context to client-go callsites in core Kubernetes. We believe that by
  making this feature available, this type of refactoring will happen over time.

## Proposal

The recommended approach is to pass the context with each action on a resource.
We will modify the signatures of all client interfaces to accept a
`context.Context` as the first argument.  This is idiomatic, explicit, and
produces the least error prone API.

## Design Details

This is an example change to `Pods.Get` implementation:

```go 
func (c *pods) Get(ctx context.Context, name string, options meta_v1.GetOptions) (result *v1.Pod, err error) {
	Result = &v1.Pod{}
	err = c.client.Get().
		Context(ctx).
		Namespace(c.ns).
		Resource("pods").
		Name(name).
		VersionedParams(&options, scheme.ParameterCodec).
		Do().
		Into(result)
	return
}
```

Here we extend the signature to add `context.Context` as the first argument,
then attach the context to the request.

Initially `lister` and `informer` APIs (both generated and generic) will not

> change.

Reviewer 3: I'd suggest dropping this line... I don't anticipate those changing as they have a lifetime longer than one request

### Risks and Mitigations

This is a breaking change that would likely require extensive changes to both
tests and implementation code throughout the impacted code bases when client-go
is upgraded.

Inside the Kubernetes codebase, we will refactor all callsites to pass
`context.TODO()` in the initial pass.

> TODO(mikedanese): Discuss and document migration path for external codebases

Author: @deads2k can you explain what you had in mind here?

Reviewer 3: For each of the generated clientsets we have (`k8s.io/{client-go,kube-aggregator,apiextensions-apiserver}`), snapshot the existing generated clientsets under a peer "deprecated" package. For example, for `k8s.io/client-go/kubernetes`:

```sh
cp -r \
  staging/src/k8s.io/client-go/kubernetes \
  staging/src/k8s.io/client-go/deprecated

find staging/src/k8s.io/client-go/deprecated -type f -print0 | 
  xargs -n 1 -0 sed -i 's#k8s\.io/client-go/kubernetes#k8s.io/client-go/deprecated#g'
```

External codebases can then do an equivalent find/replace to use the deprecated clientset packages, and spend a release migrating to the context-aware clientsets.

Author: What's the benefit to this over not upgrading external codebase's client-go?

Reviewer 3: sed of imports is easier than a go refactoring tool? I think the benefit is slight, so I'll let @deads2k defend it, but if it makes a difference between getting context threading or not, I'll live with the deprecated packages for a release

Reviewer: Jordan described it well. This is the method that @lavalamp independently described.  The sed is easy and non-conflicty across a large codebase in contrast to the conflicts approach of changing every client call at once and before anyone can add another usage.  It allows phasing the change in after updating clients.

Author: How do you feel about `k8s.io/{metrics,node-api}/pkg/client/clientset`? I'll throw those in with `k8s.io/{client-go,kube-aggregator,apiextensions-apiserver}` until I hear otherwise and won't bother with the example clientsets.

Reviewer 3: `k8s.io/node-api` is getting dropped in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/87503

I'd forgotten about k8s.io/metrics generated clientsets... PodMetricsesGetter... sigh. I guess.

Author: Ok, I paraphrased the approach and motivation.

func (c *pods) WithContext(ctx context.Context) PodInterface {
  	c.ctx = ctx
  	return c
}

```

To pass through this context, it would be necessary to change the underlying
client calls to accept the context. Example:

```go 
func (c *pods) Get(name string, options meta_v1.GetOptions) (result *v1.Pod, err error) {
	result = &v1.Pod{}
	err = c.client.Get().
		Context(c.ctx).
		Namespace(c.ns).
		Resource("pods").
		Name(name).
		VersionedParams(&options, scheme.ParameterCodec).
		Do().
		Into(result)
	return
}
```

This would result in an API that would be interacted with like so if the
consumer wished to pass a context:

```go  
   ctx := req.Context()
   pod, err := k8client.CoreV1().Pods(namespace).WithContext(ctx).Get(podName, ...)
```

This approach was rejected because:

- The idea behind using a context with a request is it is only meant to live as
  long as the initial request that created it. It is not meant to be stored. If we
  expose an error-prone API like the one outlined, the consumer would need to call
  `WithContext` on each request if a previous caller had set a context. This API

>   allows broken code to compile without actually improve the migration story.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  allows broken code to compile but would fail at runtime if multiple requests were made with the same client whose context had expired.
```
